This essay discusses how a contemporary digital artist can reject the hyper-commercialized system that governs the digital media they work in. Hyper-commercialization refers to the increasing trend of sales and marketing in everyday life and media. In the 20th century, commercialization existed in radio, television, and magazines (Beauchamp & Baran, 2017, p. 223). Today, hyper-commercialization is omnipresent as it extends into digital ecosystems that influence everyday life (Andersen, 2008, p. 171). As such, everyone now operates within this hyper-commercialized digital ecosystem, including contemporary artists who rely on digital tools to create their works. If creating art is not only about creating beauty but also about defining an attitude, then the artists today must not only be aware of this ecosystem, but they should be critical of it as well (Camus, 1951, p. 64). The Dogme manifesto, a manifesto written by filmmakers to criticize the commercialization of the film industry, provides a framework for digital artists to do just that. In this essay, I will examine how the manifesto and its criticism of commercialized film-practice can guide digital artists to create artwork in a digital ecosystem while rejecting its hyper-commercialization. By taking a skeptical approach and emphasizing the importance of not becoming wholly engrossed in these systems, artists can keep a necessary critical perspective and create meaningful art that challenges the status quo.

In 1995, on the 100th anniversary of the birth of film, four Danish filmmakers came together to create the Dogme 95 manifesto: a text containing rules and guidelines for the new filmmaker. Inside was a list of 10 rules, dramatically named The Vow Of Chastity that would guide a new approach to film aimed at turning against the ever-consolidating standards of American blockbuster movies (Yalgin, 2003, p. 1). As Hollywood films began generating more profits a formula began arising, one that saw increased success and revenue from increasingly funded films. The higher the budget, the higher the box-office success (Neale, 2003, p. 48). As budgets increased, more independent and artistic film practices were abandoned and overlooked and film began straying away from being a free art form into a standardized spectacle system (Hall, 2011, p. 8; Neale, 2003, p. 48). The purpose of the Dogme manifesto, then, was to break away from this capitalist-enforced film structure; to free the filmmaker and to create film that was a raw depiction of reality, not faked. This was the direct goal of the manifesto; to respond to the state of filmmaking at the time. However, its implications of fighting back against the commercialization of an art form are much greater. The manifesto creates an understanding that art should be freed from capitalist systems. That the chase for larger audiences, ever-improving technique, and growing ambition muddles artistic expression. Knowing this, then, how can an artist today create, when their practice inevitably collides with modern hyper-commercialization? Today, digital artists find themselves working and adapting to ever-improving technology. How can they reject and critique the systems they find themselves working in while still using them to create artwork? Although one could completely reject these technologies, doing so would be turning a blind-eye to the inevitable and allowing it to spread freely and uncriticized. The Dogme manifesto didn’t reject the system by rejecting film, rather they embraced it to turn against what it had become. In this essay, I seek to explore ways this can be done within a contemporary art practice; rejecting today’s hyper-commercialization by embracing the systems it created and using them against itself to create art.

Today, it’s common to hear older generations dwell on the video-making process of the past. All the time needed to develop film, handling all its rolls, splicing it all together. ‘You have it so easy nowadays’ they say. ‘Anyone can be a filmmaker.’ This is true to a large extent. The digitization of the film process has simplified and democratized the video making process (Mak, 2007). Moving images are no longer contained in a physical, ephemeral and rigid form. Today, a video is bytes, stings of data, replicable, transferable and malleable (Hanna, 2022). It’s cheaper, less risky, and easier to manage. With the right button clicks video can be shot, edited, and shared for free. 

It would seem that this stage of video making is a dream for the filmmakers behind the Dogme manifesto. Rule one of the manifesto states that “shooting must be done on location;” rule three is “the camera must be hand-held;” rule four “must be in color” (Yalgin, 2003, p. 1-2). They call for a radical shift away from the high-budget hollywood productions, where cameras need whole teams to operate, where infrastructure is built for camera sweeps, and where elaborate lighting schemes and lenses are used to create any scenario. Rejecting this system of filmmaking was fighting against the capitalist structure engulfing the practice. In Hollywood, the creative process and the tools used to create were capitalist rather than creative. Similarly, the contemporary artist’s process and everyday life is stained by this same system. Smartphones and their video cameras are no longer inventive devices that allow everyone to become a filmmaker. They’re products of mass consumption, used by 5.4 billion people, and becoming an everyday necessity for society (Aschoff, 2020; Datareportal, 2023). Their cameras are not made for the filmmaker, or the artist. They’re made for the consumer. Camera pixel count, the number of lenses on each smartphone, and their average price has increased over the past decade (Counterpoint research, 2022, pp. 4, 6; Statista). The chase for higher quality cameras in the hands of consumers is not for the artist, or the filmmaker, but for the companies, who’s only ability to grow rests on the constant improvement of specifications (Aldredge, 2019; Gomez, 2022) 

Hollywoods increased budgets and the increasingly sophisticated studio filming system led to larger more grandiose films, but doing so fed into the capitalist system and deteriorated expression in film (Neale, 2003, p. 53). In the same way, the ability to record 4K 60FPS videos on our smartphones has increased the fidelity and scope of the home video, but doing so feeds into the hyper-commercialization of our everyday life and doesn’t contribute to free expression. As explained by director Martin Scorcese, it’s not about the “latest technological tools and what they can do,” rather it's about the “choices [made] in the creation of the whole picture.” Artists, therefore, can reject high-quality imagery to distance themselves from its inherent ties to hyper-commercialization (Scorsese, 2021). 

In the essay In Defense of the Poor Image, artist Hito Steyerl reflects on the political connotations behind image quality. She discusses how the poor, low quality image, “transforms quality into accessibility.” As the chase for high-quality continues and costs continue rising, high quality “[establishes] its own set of hierarchies” and low quality becomes a digital common ground (Steyerl, 2009). To create art and film in high-quality is to accept the capitalist system. In the manifesto For an Imperfect Cinema, a manifesto targeting similar issues as the Dogme Manifesto, Cuban filmmaker Juan García Espinosa’s explains how technical perfection in cinema perpetuates social issues instead of being “meaningful within the revolutionary process (García Espinosa, 1979).” Art and film, as much as technology companies would disagree, doesn’t need to be high-quality. Artist Thomas Ruff’s Jpegs series explores compressed photography; photographs and images found online are blown up to large proportions, revealing their pixelated jpeg compression. In doing so, he rejects the capitalist stream of digital improvement (O'Hagan, 2017; Foto8, 2004). Even Dogme films are not high-quality as they’re forced to use cameras adapted for hand-held use. Therefore, like the filmmakers behind the Dogme manifesto called for the rejection of ‘improved’ Hollywood techniques, the modern artist can reject the capitalist system of technological improvement by embracing low quality imagery. 

The Dogme manifesto also called for the eradication of gimmick and superficiality in film, and most of its rules are attributed to this (Schepelern, 2013). Shoot on location, special lighting and effects cannot be used, genre movies are forbidden. Rule six explicitly states “the film must not contain superficial action” (Yalgin, 2003, p. 2). Today, just as it was in Hollywood, gimmicks are more prevalent than ever (Ngai, 2017; Sarokin, 2020). Cheap products that oversell promises are common in the attention grabbing digital world (Sarokin, 2020; Faccenda, Moon, & McMahon, 2022). In the Dogme manifesto, everything slightly linked to Hollywood gimmicks – props, sets, effects, genres were abandoned. The modern artist, therefore, must abandon any reliance on gimmick, and on product, and in doing so restore personal object significance. Surrealists artists offer one approach to changing one's relationship to an object. The term found object – objet trouvé – was used in the surrealist movement to describe the contextualization of existing objects in art (Hills, n.d.). Recontextualizing everyday, overlooked objects gave them new power and significance. However, in this argument, the contemporary anti-capitalist importance of this isn’t in the recontextualization of the object but rather in the relationship created between the artist and the object by this recontextualization. To find an object is to give up agency; to allow the universe to guide you to the object not vice versa. To find and embrace an object in a hyper-commercialized world where products and their advertisements are constantly forced onto the consumer allows artists to reject these systems. 

The found object approach offers a way out of hyper-commercialization for any artist working with physical media. In the digital space, however, similar conventions can be applied. Found footage film is the editing, repurposing, or recontextualization of existing film or video, shown as it was found with little to no changes (Linda Badley et al., 2005, pp. 241). The nature of found footage being a byproduct of media immediately allows it to carry significance as it becomes a representation of our media-centric world (Wees, 1993, p. 1). In his book on found footage, author WIlliam C. Wees observes how the act of a using found film distances the filmmaker from the narrative, allowing reality to permeate naturally through the screen. In his example, the two films Perfect Film (1986) and Perfect Video (1989), which consist of found media coverage of two political assassinations, unintentionally manage to capture raw insight into the media handling and reaction to the two events. He then compares these to the film Report (1967) which consists of a deliberate montage of media footage and how that approach immediately communicates the filmmakers biased intention (Wees, 1993, pp. 5-6). This increase in intention when found footage is manipulated isn’t a disadvantage, however, rather it opens up the possibility for necessary commentary. To edit and repurpose, to “collage” found film allows the filmmaker to “probe, highlight, and contrast” (Linda Badley et al., 2005, pp. 242). The power within found footage, therefore, is significant, and it offers a powerful approach to understanding and critiquing the past and the present. In today’s digital ecosystem, dominated by video content, repurposing found content offers a valuable avenue for the modern artist to critically explore and understand these systems. Artist Dina Kelberman’s project I’m Google creates a chain of found images from google images. As each image tries but fails to be exactly like the last, one watches as concepts evolve and erode over time. In doing so Dina condenses the swarm of google images data into a digestible stream, revealing pattern and understanding in an otherwise vast, overwhelming, and mysterious algorithm (Dina Kelberman, n.d; Jakob Schiller, 2013). Another example of recontextualizing found web material is artist Jon Rafman who in their project The Nine Eyes of Google screenshots unique and interesting moments captured on Google street view. In doing so, Jon explores the “detached gaze” of the google camera, allowing for a raw representation of reality (Jon Rafman, 2009). Furthermore, navigating and working within such a dystopian tool allows him to breakdown, analyze, and critique themes of privacy and surveillance in a digital world. From Dogme rejecting superficiality and embracing found objects, to artists embracing the authenticity of found media, artists working within a digital ecosystem must embrace and acknowledge the power of existing media in these spheres. Doing so rejects the hyper-commercialized trend of forced appreciation, where content and product is forced onto the consumer. By embracing lost and found media, the artist can create perspective, understanding, and discussion out of media that otherwise clogs everyday life. 

The rise of blockbusters in Hollywood meant a growing demand for spectacle. In Hollywood, this meant the pursuit of “scale, extravagance, excess, [and] prodigious expenditure” (Hall, 2011, p. 14). Practical and digital effects, props and costumes became more and more elaborate and needed for films to reach large audiences. These effects serve to trick the audience and to perpetuate a superficial reflection of reality. According to the Dogme filmmakers, film is not an illusion (Utterson, 2005). To counteract this, the Dogme manifesto sought to restore a sense of reality in film. Rule one “shooting must be done on location” seeks to move away from artificial sets, rule two states that sounds must not be faked and music not used,” and rules four and five call for no artificial lighting or filters. Enormous budgets and improving technology allowed for filmmakers to create anything. In doing so, however, the filmmakers behind Dogme realized that real artistic expression of the human experience was lost. Today a similar phenomenon exists in improving creative software. It is here, however, where I break away from my pattern of argument so far. Instead of following in the footsteps of the Dogme approach; instead of rejecting similar issues in the same way, I instead need to march in the opposite direction. Dogme sought to completely reject any ”extravagance” in film and avoided all superficial effects. Arguing to do the same within a digital practice would not be as beneficial to the contemporary artist as it's crucial that art is created within these systems and processes in order to gain a more critical understanding. Instead, I suggest the need for an exploitative, experimental, and unorthodox approach to software. Improvements in both hardware and in software allow applications to be increasingly more multidisciplinary. Video applications allow for sound manipulation, 3D applications like Unreal Engine allow for the creation of film, sound, sculpture, engineering, and architecture, image software that can animate (TechCrunch, 2022). There’s websites that allow for music production, AI tools that create and manipulate imagery,  and smartphone applications that allow for free creative expression. In this digital landscape, the artist must not only embrace multidisciplinarity, but seek to use the software in unintended ways. Artist Trevor Paglan’s series Adversarially Evolved Hallucination used artificial intelligence to generate images of things outside their trained datasets. In doing so, he induces ‘AI hallucination’ as it tries to create something from something that isn’t there (Paglen, 2017). In this example, Trevor embraces new technology, and pushes it beyond its intended purpose, allowing for a more critical, explorative, and deep understanding of the inner workings of such a novel technology. Artist Aaron Koblin’s work The Sheep Market is an artwork consisting of 10,000 sheep drawings created by people working for Amazon’s mechanical turk program where people are paid small amounts of money to complete small tasks (Amazon Mechanical Turk; Koblin, 2006). Although the medium is questionable, creating artwork within it, and using the program in a way so different to its intended use creates an avenue for people to understand the controversial system. Contemporary digital artists, therefore, unlike Dogme filmmakers who rejected the novelty of Hollywood technology, must embrace the new possibilities created by advanced creative technologies. They must seek to use them in unintended ways, to experiment, to turn every dial to the max, to change, counter, and challenge predetermined use, design, and intention. Doing so challenges the hyper-commercialized system they exist in by pushing boundaries in the digital landscape and in doing so revealing avenues of necessary commentary. 
	
The Dogme manifesto, although sometimes seen as more of an “expression of discontent” rather than a true practice, as many of the Dogme films did not fully follow the rules of Dogme and the filmmakers involved quickly moved on to other projects, still brought to light the concern of capitalism and hyper-commercialization in artistic practice (Chiappe, 2020). Its vows offer a clear and direct approach to rejecting systems that stain the free expression of reality and human experience. Furthermore, the straightforwardness of these points allow them to transcend beyond the world of filmmaking into other artistic practices that are in equal need of defending against capitalist systems, especially those within the digital ecosystem that accelerates them. In this essay, inspired by Dogme’s rejection of over-improvement, new technology, and superficiality I determine that a digital artist can reject hyper-commercialization by rejecting high-quality, rejecting fed media and product, as well as pushing new technology in unaccounted directions. While these approaches offer a valid way of challenging hyper-commercialization within the digital space, they do not fully account for a proper dismantling of these systems rather they ground the artist and allow them to become aware and critical of ways they influence creative expression. The Dogme manifesto, at the end of the day, didn’t dismantle the Hollywood system but that wasn’t their intention. Rather, they allowed the filmmaker to realize the influence it had on their practice. Embracing low-quality, found objects and footage, and pushing creative software doesn’t create a complete or radical approach. Instead, to fully critique and reject these systems, artists must continue to combine thought, research, intention, and process to fully challenge and dismantle them. 

Bibliography

Aldredge, J. (2019, September 10). The Video Camera Trends Currently Re-Shaping the Industry. The Beat. PremiumBeat.com. https://www.premiumbeat.com/blog/video-camera-trends-currently-re-shaping-industry/

Amazon Mechanical Turk. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.mturk.com/

Andersen, R., & Gray, J. (Eds.). (2008). Battleground: The Media (Vol. 1, A-N). Greenwood Press.

Aschoff, N. (2020). The Smartphone Society: Technology, Power, and Resistance in the New Gilded Age. Beacon Press Books.

Badley, L., Palmer, R. B., & Schneider, S. J. (2005). Traditions in world cinema. Edinburgh University Press.

Beauchamp, S. R., & Baran, S. J. (2017). Introduction to Human Communication: Perception, Meaning, and Identity. Oxford University Press.

Camus, A. (1951). The Rebel. Penguin.

Chiappe, B. (2020, November 12). Was Dogme 95 a successful manifesto? Was it a manifesto at all? The UCL Film & TV Society Blog. https://blog.uclfilm.com/2020/11/11/was-dogme-95-a-successful-manifesto-was-it-a-manifesto-at-all/

Coldewey, D. (2022, April 11). Why should you care about Unreal Engine 5? TechCrunch. https://techcrunch.com/2022/04/11/what-is-epic-games-unreal-5/?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAN53Z3bT2wvYL-r7QOhumWmgL7TV22cJzxVn6gg3YB10cib17QSH2z3jyZQlI-mSkOU_ihytpVTZeHOaOWnIMevtNhkjz5uptE9KgmNmGXebOG9z_gF7wgqns2n_UI-h8oHfgUydJrybknBPgRrC4xC9j2fiZJLZJgnJCDRITV7x

Counterpoint research. (2022). Smartphone Imaging Trends: New Directions Capturing Magic Moments.

Datareportal. (2023). Digital Around the World. Kepios. https://datareportal.com/global-digital-overview

Faccenda, A., Moon, J., & McMahon, C. (2022, August 31). 34 "TikTok Made Me Buy It" Products You Shouldn't Sleep On. Buzzfeed. https://www.buzzfeed.com/alifacc/tik-tok-made-me-buy-it-products-you-shouldnt

Foto8. (2004, October 24). Thomas Ruff interview. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20120318041843/http://www.foto8.com/home/content/view/178/155/


García Espinosa, J. (1979). For an imperfect cinema (J. Burton, Trans.). Jump Cut, (20), 24-26.

Gomez, A. (2022, April 21). Why Successful Tech Companies Must Balance Innovation And Adaptability. Forbes. Available at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2022/04/21/why-successful-tech-companies-must-balance-innovation-and-adaptability/?sh=3f20741751ac

Hall, S. (2011). Blockbusters. Oxford University Press.

Hanna, K. T. (2022, October). What is a digital video? TechTarget. https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/definition/digital-video

Hills, M. (n.d.). Found objects in art. Art UK. https://artuk.org/discover/curations/found-objects-in-art#:~:text=In%20the%201920s%20and%201930s,or%20placed%20in%20unexpected%20situations.

Kelberman, D. (n.d.). Im Google [Website]. Retrieved from https://imgoogle.dinakelberman.com/

Koblin, A. (2006). Aaron Koblin. http://www.aaronkoblin.com/work/thesheepmarket/

Mak, M. (2007). Digital Cinematic Technology and the Democratization of Independent Cinema. (Unpublished master's thesis). McGill University.

Neale, S. (2003). Movie Blockbusters. Routledge.

Ngai, S. (2017). Theory of Gimmick. The University of Chicago.

O'Hagan, S. (2017, September 26). Blurred porn and Mars in 3D: the unsettling visions of Thomas Ruff. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/sep/26/thomas-ruff-photographs-whitechapel-retrospective-profile

Paglen, T. (2017). Hallucinations. Paglen Studio. https://paglen.studio/2020/04/09/hallucinations/

Rafman, J. (2009, August 12). IMG MGMT: The Nine Eyes of Google Street View. Artfcity. http://artfcity.com/2009/08/12/img-mgmt-the-nine-eyes-of-google-street-view/

Sarokin, D. (2020, August 11). How to Create a Gimmick to Get People Interested. Chron. https://smallbusiness.chron.com/create-gimmick-people-interested-33654.html

Schepelern, P. (2013, December 13). After the Celebration: The Effect of Dogme on Danish Cinema. Kosmorama. https://www.kosmorama.org/en/kosmorama/artikler/after-celebration-effect-dogme-danish-cinema

Schiller, J. (2013, April 11). Google Image Algorithms Still No Match for Human Powers of Association. Wired. https://www.wired.com/2013/04/dina-kelberman-im-google/

Scorsese, M. (2021). Il Maestro: Federico Fellini and the lost magic of cinema. Harper’s Magazine. https://harpers.org/archive/2021/03/il-maestro-federico-fellini-martin-scorsese/

Statista. (2023, March 16). Average price per smartphone worldwide from 2013 to 2027.

Steyerl, H. (2009). In Defense of the Poor Image. E-flux Journal, (10).

Utterson, A. (2005). Technology and Culture, the Film Reader. Routledge.

Wees, W. C. (1993). Recycled images: The art and politics of found footage films. Anthology Film Archives.

Wees, W.C. (1993) 'Recycled Images: The Art and Politics of Found Footage Films', Laika, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1

Wong, Q. (2020, September 3). TikTok ads have pushed scams about apps, diet pills, other products, report says. CNET. https://www.cnet.com/news/privacy/tiktok-ads-used-to-push-scams-about-apps-diet-pills-and-other-products-report-says/

Yalgin, E. (2003). Dogme 95: Manifesto For Contemporary Cinema and Realism. Bilkent University.
