Two robot rats, with arduino brains connected through a serial transfer running across their entangled tails, slowly crawl across the floor. One has eyes and wheels – effectively able to navigate its environment. The other is less fortunate. With no limbs or visual senses, it only experiences the world through sound and vibration. They’re both from the same species – siblings, escaped from a convoluted rat king, struggling to survive. Alone, these two rats face difficult circumstances. Amidst it all, however, a surprising behavior emerges. The more able rat, rather than abandon its less able sibling, picks up extra responsibility and prioritizes its safety and well being instead. Why does the rat choose the more difficult path of cooperation and company? How does such behavior arise? By breaking down the biological function of rats and then reconstructing them robotically, our group gained a deeper and more nuanced understanding of the species leading us to form a new perspective on human society. In this essay, which admittedly, flies quickly through messy brainstorms and convoluted ratking-like ideas, I explore the creation of our robot rats and the scientific and conceptual discoveries along the way.

We began by formulating the theoretical and technical approach our group would take to create our robotic rat. From sharing our individual connotations towards rats it was interesting to observe how we quickly understood that rats exist in a uniquely chastised corner of our psyche.They’re dirty creatures that squirm in our walls, spread disease, and eat our food. Predominantly negative, our opinions on rats are primal, created throughout the evolution of our species as we’re continually affected by the presence of rats throughout our history (Modlinska, Pisula, 2020). What was once perhaps a subconscious survival tactic in ancient primates, hatred for rats today is fundamentally ingrained in our immediate connotations and understanding of the animal. Perhaps out of pity for the rejected rodent species, we quickly agreed that our robotic rat exploration should shed new light on rats by understanding their point of view. We began then, to delve into research exploring prosocial behavior in rats – learning about the psychological and communal characteristics of the species. It wasn’t long into our very first round of quick shallow research that we began learning about human-like behaviors in rats. We learnt that rats carry a strong sense of empathy between themselves, a characteristic not common in many animals, especially those with similar brain capacities (Keysers et al., 2022; Gómez-Lea et al., 2021). Their strong sense of empathy was surprising, and offered a very different perspective to what we think of rats so we decided to delve deeper into this behavior.  

In biology, animal behavior that involves a gain for the dependent and none for the provider is described as altruistic behavior (Batson, 1991). Unlike egoistic behavior, described as sacrificial acts with sole benefit to the provider, altruistic behavior does not create an immediate sense of benefit (Martineau, 1896). An important element that allows for altruistic behavior is the ability to emphasize. Empathy is a complex process that involves first recognizing your own existence and perspective, recognizing the existence of another animal, and applying the two, creating a mirror brain state in the empathizer, allowing for a deeper level of cognitive understanding (Keysers, Kanapska, 2022). Rat empathy shares the same complex brain processes as humans – their neural patterns mirror those present in the brains of human empathizing (Levy, 2021). The ability to empathize – its origin and purpose – continues to puzzle biologists (Dugatkin, 2007). Evolutionary biology states that the main goal consistent between all species is the continuation of genetic code (Colby, 1996). Before factoring in higher, more sophisticated emergent properties of complex species, all animals are fundamentally competing for resources needed to replicate their genes onto a new generation (Dawkins, 1976). All animals, wherever they may find themselves, compete for the shared resources of their environment. Ecological competition over limited resources exists both as interspecific competition, competition between different species, and intraspecific competition, amongst the same species (Townsend et al., 2000). Ecological systems, therefore, are difficult to navigate, and require decisive action to allow genes to pass through generations. In such conditions, evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins states that “selfishness is to be expected” in living organisms since even amongst themselves the need for the individual transfer of genes exceeds the needs of a collective species (Dawkins, 1976, p. 33). In this understanding of biological systems, altruism exists exclusively between the possessor of the gene, the parent, and the inheritor, its kin. Rats, however, offer a compelling case that breaks this biological understanding of altruism. An experiment exploring altruism in rats showed that free rats would not just consistently free trapped rats, but share food with them as well (Bartal et al., 2011). Even studies exploring whether this behavior might be food motivated found that food rewards did not substantially influence the tendency for free rats to release captured ones (Blystad et al., 2019). Furthermore, rats in the presence of trapped rats showed greater signs of emotional stress than control groups, observed through more movement, problem-solving, and attempts to break the trap (Bartal et al., 2011). In that study, changes resulting in less favorable outcomes for freeing the rats like different food rewards and preventing contact after gaining freedom had no effect in their behavior, suggesting it stemmed from a greater notion than Dawkins' selfish view of biological altruism. How, then, does this selfless behavior manifest itself? Where does it come from, and what purpose does it serve? We asked ourselves these questions as we transitioned into the more technical planning and prototyping phase of our robotic exploration, not knowing that this phase would lead us to many of their answers. 

Components and construction, senses and movement, we needed to conceptualize how we would physically assemble our robotic rat. Before selecting our components, we began by understanding their senses and learnt that urban rats rely primarily on sound, vibration, and touch. Rat vision is quite poor and lacks detail since it is specialized for dim conditions and more important for a prey animal to distinguish movement than detail (Leinonen, Tanila, 2018). Rather than an ultrasonic sensor which provides more accurate spatial information, we decided to use light dependent resistors as eyes since their function is closer to rat eyes. Rats don’t rely much on vision, and therefore touch becomes their primary sense for navigation (Parmiani, 2018). With a wide spread of thin whiskers on either side of their face, whiskers allow rats to feel objects in front of them and keep track of their movement along surfaces (Prescott et al., 2009). In our robotic rat switch push buttons with prodded hairs would behave most like whiskers allowing us to register physical presses upon contact. Our final sensor, then, would represent their ability to precisely detect vibrations and sound and although a great part of their hearing comes from their whiskers, a sound sensor in our robot would provide equal opportunity to detect sound. By sticking to sensors that accurately reflect real rat senses and excluding those that could have provided more valuable information we found ourselves questioning why and how such a successful animal can be reduced to such simple components. Other rodents, like squirrels and guinea pigs have much better eyesight than rats (Angier, 2010). How come the senses of rats differ so drastically to other species of the same mammillary order? Genetic studies of urban rats have shown that despite not having been around long, city environments can heavily impact a species genome and accelerate the rate of evolution. Rural rats show many biological differences to urban rats in bone structure, hormonal levels, diet, and behavior (Jacob,. et al, 2022; Quenqua, 2018; Combs,. et al 2018; Harpak et al 2020). Through discussion, we realized that comparing urban rats to rural ones and other rodents is futile considering their environmental differences. The urban environment of city rats is wholly unique and naturally unfound. Pipes, sewer systems, and human construction offer radically different physical landscapes than open fields and trees (McDavid & Mood, 1972). Rat senses are built to navigate these unique spaces and complex human-built systems. Rat whiskers operate much like human hands do by actively homing in on objects and gaining understanding by thoroughly feeling objects. They’re extremely precise, allowing rats to detect and understand objects as small as a human coin (Prescott,. et al, 2009). In an environment dominated by touch-driven humans, precise whisker navigation allows rats to effectively navigate pipes, sewer systems, and walls as well as operate more complex mechanisms (Harpak et al., 2021). The auditory senses of rats are also conditioned by their anthropocentric environment. More vulnerable than other city species, rats rely on occupying and hiding in dark, interstitial spaces (Eaton, 1972). In such spaces, their relationship with their environment and the humans occupying it is experienced in the form of sound and vibration. Rats are able to detect low frequency sounds using whiskers, allowing them to specifically identify and discriminate between human voices and other sounds amongst loud background noise (Riley et al., 2021). Lastly, because of their intramural nature, rats’ olfactory sense plays an important role in determining where food is located without searching and exposing themselves (Benedict, 2019). Unlike in rural environments, food in their anthropocentric environment almost always has a looming human threat. To fundamentally understand city rats, one has to realize that their entire existence, function, and behavior is fundamentally rooted in their anthropocentric environment. They operate in a unique, specific, and modern habitat, constantly in an ambivalent relationship with humans, who simultaneously act as both their environmental provider and main threat. 

Understanding that their anthropocentric environment strongly affects their existence created a new perspective on the altruistic behavior we were previously learning about. If rats are so physically adapted to their anthropocentric environment, then perhaps their altruistic behavior is also an emergent property of inhabiting an environment dominated by another species. Unlike the slower process of genetic evolution, behavioral evolution operates much quicker, allowing for behavioral change amidst closely-related species in specific environments (Hernández, Rivera, et al., 2021; Rand, n.d). In this light, if empathy allows for rats to free other rats from human mechanisms and share food, then altruistic behavior might have developed or strengthened to survive in an anthropocentric environment. Altruistic behavior often emerges as an evolutionary tactic to increase the chances of survival amidst competitive and difficult ecologies (McGlynn, 2010). With the difficulties of living in a human-centric environment, it wouldn’t be surprising if rats developed collective empathy as a survival strategy for suppressed conditions. Considering the collective rather than the individual may be the key for rats not only surviving in, but thriving in environments characterized by constraints and scarcity. 

The condition of our planet is becoming more and more like those of an urban rat. The globe is no longer a sprawling habitat, untapped and full of resources. Like rats, confined by concrete and steel, humans are living in a world becoming ever more restricted by our very own socio-economic systems (Chancel, 2020). Around 12,000 years ago, humans transitioned from a hunter-gatherer lifestyle to one centered around agriculture and the accumulation of resources (Groeneveld, 2016). Being able to collect food, store it, and distribute it created for the first time new hierarchical systems: power could now manifest itself through who has control over food and who doesn’t (Diamond, 1997). This division of power continued to grow and evolve as human societies did, and today it manifests itself socially, economically, and politically (Wilkinson, 2005). Modern capitalist structures create harsh conditions for its human inhabitants by mismanaging the distribution of resources and catering for a select few (Piketty, 2014). Today, most human populations find themselves trapped and oppressed by these systems (Olivier, 2015). Furthermore, their production and consumption driven nature has had a devastating impact on our natural environment through fossil fuel emissions and over-extraction of resources (Monbiot, 2021). As a result, the stability of our food, shelter, and safety is at risk, victim to our own systems. The evolution of rats has successfully found a way to thrive in a confined environment. Given the circumstances we find ourselves in within an equally human corrupted environment then perhaps their altruistic, communal behavior of rats can be adapted in humans. 

In our robot, empathy existed in the form of a direct connection between the two rats, physically transmitting information from one to the other. It’s a simple representation of the concept, yet it creates a compelling question. Where does such a simple, direct, and clear form of communication exist in modern society? As our populations grow at increasing rates, interspecies communication begins to dwindle and despite modern technology bridging gaps we continue to struggle with strong, universal, and well-informed communication (Szalai, 2023). In Charles Vogl’s book ‘The Art of Community,’ the definition of community as “a group of individuals who share a mutual concern for another one’s welfare” happens to share the definition of altruistic behavior in rats (Vogl, 2016). Adapting our lives to match those of rats calls for the strengthening of communities and less reliance on larger unjust systems. If humans have come to where we are today by believing that we are a force outside of nature rather than inside it, as economist E. F Schumacher states, then living in smaller, more connected, rat-like communities offers a possibility to change that narrative and accept that we too, live in an environment that is outside of our control. In accepting that our capitalistically impacted environment confines more than provides, one can recognize that the only path forward is to abandon the larger encompassing structures that govern us. Smaller communities with smaller chains of production are just as able to sustainably maintain themselves and in doing so strengthen quality of living (Schumacher, 1973, Mapplethorpe, 2020). Shortening the networks that provide resources and localizing production could adjust our relationship with the environment and change our human-centric attitude to one aware that our resources are limited and shared across all living organisms. Rats do this subconsciously, unaware that their environment inherently calls for such behavior. Furthermore, communities with strong more specific person to person connections provide a stronger communal fabric than larger less personal and more disconnected modern communities (Vogl, 2016). By cultivating more altruistic communities, like those of rats, humans would not only survive for longer, but thrive in doing so. 

Our robotic exploration of rats created a unique lens through which to understand their biological systems and in turn our own human systems. By delving into the behaviors and adaptations of rats, we uncovered valuable insights into our own societal structures and modes of existence. The altruistic behavior observed in rats, driven by empathy and communal connection as a response to their oppressive environment prompts reflection on the sustainability and resilience of human communities, particularly in the face of environmental constraints and socio-economic inequities. Moreover, the process of constructing robotic rats serves as a reminder of our place within the broader natural world, challenging our anthropocentric perspective and encouraging a more humble approach to understanding modern life. By embracing the lessons gleaned from studying rats and their adaptations to urban environments, we are prompted to reconsider our own societal frameworks and explore alternative pathways towards a more sustainable and compassionate way of living. The gained understanding from this project, beyond the robotics itself, revealed the importance of robotic driven exploration. Deconstructing a biological creature to their fundamental components allows one to scrutinize every aspect of its function, and in doing so evaluate the function of the species as a whole. By turning robotic engineers into creators of artificial lifeforms, biological robotics encourages them to adopt a student's mindset toward Mother Nature. The naturally evolving systems one can learn from exist not only in biological forms, but in the systems that govern biological creatures as well. In our robotic rat exploration, examining the natural senses and anatomy of rats led to evaluate their natural societal system, and as a result re-evaluate our own societal structures. Recognizing that rats have adapted to environments of scarcity and constraint by cultivating strong communal connection, we realized that humans today, constrained by capitalist systems, needed to employ similar strategies; to harness the power of small communities rich in close connection and in doing so return to a more symbiotic relationship with our habitat.


References

Angier, N. (2010, July 5). Nut? What Nut? The Squirrel Outwits to Survive. The New York	Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/06/science/06angi.html

Bartal, I. B.-A., Decety, J., & Mason, P. (2011). Empathy and Pro-Social Behavior in Rats. Science. 334(6061), 1427-1430. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1210789

Batson, C. D., & Shaw, L. L. (1991). Evidence for Altruism: Toward a Pluralism of Prosocial Motives. In Psychological Inquiry, 2(2). Taylor & Francis, Ltd.

Benedict, S. (2019, October 13). How Good is a Rat’s Sense of Smell? Truly Nolen Blog. Retrieved from: https://www.trulynolen.ca/how-good-is-a-rats-sense-of-smell/

Blystad, M. H., Andersen, D., & Johansen, E. B. (2019). Female rats release a trapped cagemate following shaping of the door opening response: Opening latency when the restrainer was	baited with food, was empty, or contained a cagemate. PLoS One, 14(10),	e0223039. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0223039

Chancel, L. (2020). Unsustainable Inequalities: Social Justice and the Environment. Translated by M. DeBevoise. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Massachusetts; London, England.

Colby, C. (1996). Introduction to Evolutionary Biology (Version 2). Retrieved from https://www.ugr.es/~jmgreyes/evolsynop.pdf

Combs, M., Byers, K. A., Ghersi, B. M., Blum, M. J., Caccone, A., Costa, F., Himsworth, C. G., Richardson, J. L., & Munshi-South, J. (2018). Urban rat races: spatial population genomics of brown rats (Rattus norvegicus) compared across multiple cities. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 285(1880), 20180245 https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2018.0245
David Rand. (n.d.). Evolution of Behavior [Lecture notes]. Biology Lesson 48, Brown University. Retrieved from https://biomed.brown.edu/Courses/BIO48/16.Evol.Behavior.HTML

Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selfish Gene (1st ed.). New York: Oxford University Press

Diamond, J. (1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. W. W. Norton & Company: New York, London.

Dugatkin, L. A. (2007). Inclusive Fitness Theory from Darwin to Hamilton. In J. F. Crow & W.F.Dove (Eds.), Anecdotal, Historical and Critical Commentaries on Genetics. Genetics, 176(3),	1375–1380. https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/176.3.1375

Eaton, T.J. (1972). How Rats Enter Homes from Sewers. Allegheny County Health Department: Ohio.Retrieved from										https://harrisontwp.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/RatsInSewersTrifoldRev.pdf

Gómez-Leal, R., Costa, A., Megías-Robles, A., Fernández-Berrocal, P., & Faria, L. (2021). Relationship between emotional intelligence and empathy towards humans and animals. PeerJ,9, e11274. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.11274

Groeneveld, E. (2016, December 9). Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Societies. World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved from https://www.worldhistory.org/article/991/prehistoric-hunter-gatherer-societies/

Harpak, A., Garud, N., Rosenberg, N. A., Petrov, D. A., Combs, M., Pennings, P. S., & Munshi-South, J. (2021). Genetic adaptation in New York City rats. Genome Biology and Evolution, 13(1), evaa247. https://doi.org/10.1093/gbe/evaa247

Hernández, D. G., Rivera, C., Cande, J., Zhou, B., Stern, D. L., & Berman, G. J. (2021). A framework for studying behavioral evolution by reconstructing ancestral repertoires. eLife, 10, e61806. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.61806

Jacob, J., Watanabe, S., Richardson, J., Gonzales, N., Ploppert, E., Lahvis, G., Shiels, A., Wenger, S., Saverino, K., Bhalerao, J., Crockett, B., Burns, E., Harding, O., Fischer-Stenger, K., & Lambert, K. (2022). Divergent neural and endocrine responses in wild-caught and laboratory-bred Rattus norvegicus. Behavioural Brain Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2022.113978

Keysers, C., Knapska, E., Moita, M. A., & Gazzola, V. (2022). Emotional contagion and prosocial behavior in rodents. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 26(8), 688-706. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2022.05.005

Leinonen, H., & Tanila, H. (2017). Vision in laboratory rodents—Tools to measure it and		implications for behavioral research. Behavioural Brain Research.					https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2017.07.040

Levy, M. G. (2021, August 5). What Rat Empathy May Reveal About Human Compassion. Wired. Retrieved from										https://www.wired.com/story/what-rat-empathy-may-reveal-about-human-compassion/

Mapplethorpe, T. (2020, January 14). Can we build healthier, more resilient and connected communities? UK Health Security Agency. Retrieved from: ttps://ukhsa.blog.gov.uk/2020/01/14/can-we-build-healthier-more-resilient-and-connected-communities/

Martineau, H. (1896). The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte: Freely Translated and Condensed in Three Volumes (Vol. 1). London: George Bell & Sons

McDavid, C. G., & Mood, E. W. (1972). Biological aspects of urban rat control. HSMHA Health Reports, 87(1). https://doi.org/PMC1616119

McGlynn, T. P. (2010). How Does Social Behavior Evolve? Nature Education Knowledge, 3(10), 69. Retrieved from https://www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/how-does-social-behavior-evolve-13260245/

Modlinska, K., & Pisula, W. (2020). The Natural History of Model Organisms: The Norway rat,	from an obnoxious pest to a laboratory pet. eLife, 9, e50651.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50651

Monbiot, G. (2021, October 30). Capitalism is Killing the Planet: It's Time to Stop Buying into	Our Own Destruction. The Guardian. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/oct/30/capitalism-is-killing-the-planet-its-time-to-stop-buying-into-our-own-destruction

Olivier, B. (2015). Capitalism and suffering. Psychology in Society, n.48, Stellenbosch.		http://dx.doi.org/10.17159/2309-8708/2015/n48a1

Parmiani, P., Lucchetti, C., & Franchi, G. (2018, February 21). Whisker and Nose Tactile Sense	Guide Rat Behavior in a Skilled Reaching Task. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 12, Article 24. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2018.00024

Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Translated by A. Goldhammer. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Massachusetts; London, England.

Prescott, T. J., Pearson, M. J., Mitchinson, B., & et al. (2009). Whisking with robots from rat vibrissae to biomimetic technology for active touch. IEEE Robotics and Automation	 Magazine, 16(3), 42-50. https://doi.org/10.1109/MRA.2009.933624

Quenqua, D. (2018, October 16). City Rats Eat Meat. Country Rats Eat What They Can. The New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/16/science/rats-cities-meat.html

Riley, J. R., Borland, M. S., Tamaoki, Y., Skipton, S. K., & Engineer, C. T. (2021). Auditory Brainstem Responses Predict Behavioral Deficits in Rats with Varying Levels of Noise-Induced Hearing Loss. Neuroscience, 477, 63-75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2021.10.003

Schumacher, E. F. (1973). Small is Beautiful: Economics as If People Mattered. Blond & Briggs: London.

Szalai, J. (2023, December 31). The Problem of Misinformation in an Era Without Trust. The New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/31/books/review/elon-musk-trust-misinformation-disinformation.html

Townsend, C. R., Harper, J. L., & Begon, M. (2000). Essentials of Ecology. Blackwell Science, Inc.

Vogl, C. H. (2016). The Art of Community: Seven Principles for Belonging. Berrett-Koehle Publishers, Inc.: California.

Wilkinson, W. (2005, January/February). Capitalism and Human Nature. Policy Report. Cato Institute. Retrieved from https://www.cato.org/policy-report/january/february-2005/capitalism-human-nature
